Module 5: Global Climate Change Module
================
FREC 3004 Environmental Informatics

## Science question

How do recent rates of global temperature and atmospheric CO2 change
compare to pre-human rates of change?

## Environmental Learning Objectives:

  - To analyze global temperature data to see if Earth’s average global
    temperatures are increasing
  - To analyze CO2 data to see if atmospheric levels are increasing
  - To correlate CO2 data with global temperature to see if there is a
    relationship
  - To compare current trends with rates of change during pre-historic
    periods using ice core data
  - To interpret what these results mean for understanding current
    climate change

## Data Science Learning Objectives

  - Apply joins to combine data tables

## Assumed R knowledge

  - mutate()
  - group\_by()
  - ggplot()
  - geom\_line()
  - geom\_point()
  - select()
  - summarize()
  - mean()
  - filter()
  - rename()
  - read\_csv()
  - lm()
  - rbind()
  - geom\_abline()
  - geom\_smooth()
  - geom\_histogram()
  - head()
  - read\_delim()
  - rename()
  - slice()
  - as.numeric()
  - paste0()
  - for loop
  - if-else statement
  - ifelse()
  - vector()
  - geom\_hline()

## R knowlege covered in module

  - joins (i.e., left\_join(), right\_join(), etc.)

## Why this matters:

Current climate change is affecting many aspects of the environment,
with socio-economic consequences. For example, a warmer climate can
allow new diseases to be introduced and persist (e.g. West Nile became
established in the United States after an unusually warm winter allowed
the mosquitoes that carry the virus to survive and spread). We are
concerned not only with the actual temperature, but also with the rate
that the temperature changes. Very rapid changes make it more likely
that species (maybe even including humans\!) cannot adapt and will go
extinct.

## Outline:

1.  Determine current rates of air temperature and CO2 change from
    modern datasets.
2.  Explore whether temperature and CO2 concentrations are related.
3.  Compare current rates to pre-historical rates of change using data
    from an ice core to investigate how climate has changed in the past.

## Initiate Project

First, create a directory structure for this module (i.e., project).

  - Create a folder called `FREC3004_Module5_ClimateChange`

Within that folder, create folders for the following

  - `doc`: where you will put text documents associated with the project
  - `data_raw`: where you will put raw data and metadata
  - `results`: where you will save files generated by analysis
  - `src`: where you will save your scripts (i.e., .R or .Rmd files)

Load the tidyverse

``` r
library(tidyverse)
library(lubridate)
```

Make sure this files is in the working directory for this module

## Step 1, Part 1: Change in global temperatures

**Acquire data**

Getting the air temperature data

These data are compiled by the Goddard Institute for Space Studies,
NASA.  
Visit <https://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/> and download the file for
‘Global-mean monthly, seasonal, and annual means’. This may require
right clicking (or in on a Mac control-clicking) on the csv link and
selecting ‘Download linked File’.  
Move the downloaded file to your project data directory. The file should
be called `GLB.Ts+dSST.csv`.

Important: the units of temperature are Celsius but they are provided as
an anomaly. An anomaly is the difference from a reference temperature.
To calculate the anomaly the mean temperature between 1951-1980 is
subtract from each raw temperature value. Therefore, a value of 0.5 is a
year that is 0.5 degree Celsius warmer than the 1951-1980 mean. It does
NOT mean that the average temperature was 0.5 Celsius. Be sure your
plots include the units and state that it is an anomaly.

**Import data**

Open the dataset in a text editor. You will notice that the first row is
a title (`Station: Global Means`) and the second row is the header for
each column. This first row will mess up the import of the data if we
aren’t careful. Fortunately the read\_csv function has an option for
skipping lines.  
In this case we only want to skip the first line so use `skip = 1`.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

You will analyze the annual data, which has a column header of `J-D`. To
make the dataset easier to work with you should select only the `Year`
and `J-D` columns. Call your new dataframe `global_temp_annual`. Then
change the names of the the year and temperature columns to `year` and
`annual_temp`

``` r
#INSERT CODE
global_temp_annual <- 
```

**Visualize data**

Make a scatter plot of temperature change over time. To help guide the
eye, add a geom layer that calculates a smoothing line through the data:
`geom_smooth()`

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

**Model data**

Now, determine the rate of change. Determining rates of change
graphically is straightforward. The average rate of change is just the
change in temperature divided by the change in time, or change in y
divided by the change in x, or the slope of a line that fits through the
data. These are all the same thing. Use R to calculate the slope of a
line using the `lm` function.

The R-squared (R2) is a statistic resulting from a linear regression
analysis, which is the statistical name for what you just did by adding
a trend line. It describes the proportion of variation in the dependent
variable explained by the independent variable. When R2 ~1, the data
form a perfectly straight line. As the data become more scattered from
the line, R2 decreases toward 0. Higher R-squared values indicate a
stronger relationship between the two variables. Record your R2 value
down with your slope.

Examine the summary of the fit below

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

**Question 1:** (provide the answers)

  - Equation for the line:

  - R2 =

  - Rate of air temperature change (include units):

  - Given your analysis, is Earth warming? How do you know?

**Model data**

Many scientists claim that drastic changes in global temperature began
around 1950 when fossil-fuel-powered transportation became a mainstay
for most families. Test this hypothesis by adjusting your trend line so
that it only looks at the most recent decades, after personal
transportation became common. You can do this by:

  - Create a dateset with data after 1950
  - Create a plot just as you did before for the post 1950 period and
    add the trend line.

<!-- end list -->

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

**Question 2:** (provide the answers)

  - Equation for the line:

  - R2 =

  - Rate of air temperature change (include units):

  - Compare the slopes of these two lines (1880 through 2017 versus 1950
    through 2017). Does your analyses support the hypothesis that the
    rate of global average temperature change is increasing through
    time?

## Step 2, Part 2: Changes in atmospheric CO2

In 1958, Dr. Charles David Keeling (1928-2005), who was a scientist at
Scripps Institute of Oceanography, began collecting data on atmospheric
CO2 concentration at the Mauna Loa Observatory located in Hawaii. This
dataset is what allowed us to understand the degree to which climate
change is human-caused through our burning of fossil fuels and release
of CO2 into the atmosphere. Due to his scientific achievements,
Dr. Keeling was awarded the National Medal of Science by President
George W. Bush in 2002. This is the highest award for lifetime
scientific achievement that can be granted in the U.S. Today, you get to
analyze this same dataset, except that you have more data that was
available to Dr. Keeling and his colleagues, because your dataset
extends up to current time.

**Acquire data**

Getting the atmospheric CO2 data: The longest measurements of
atmospheric CO2 concentrations have been done in Mauna Loa, Hawaii. The
simplest way to access the data is directly from the Mauna Loa page.
<http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends/>

(You can already see some graphs plotted on this page, but since you
want to analyze these data yourself to determine a rate of change, you
will have to download them.) Select the ‘Data’ tab. Scroll down to the
bottom of the page to ‘Data’. Select “Mauna Loa CO2 annual mean data”

The data will appear as a .txt web page. This is a common format for
datasets that are relatively small and easily downloadable. There is a
lot of text at the top that describes the dataset. The data are
presented as a column of years, the mean CO2 as ppm (parts per mil, or
micromoles per mol of air), and the last column is the estimated
uncertainty in the annual mean is the standard deviation.

**Import data**

This a trickier dataset to read in. Use the skills you have developed in
the last two modules to read the file in.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
co2_data <- 
```

**Visualize data**

As you did for air temperature, plot a graph of CO2 vs time.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

**Model data**

Determine the current rate of change for atmospheric CO2 data by fitting
a trend line, as you did for air temperatures.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

**Question 3:** (provide the answers)

  - Equation for the line:

  - R2 =

  - Rate of air CO2 change (include units):

  - Based on your analysis, has atmospheric CO2 concentration increased?
    How confident are you in these results?

## Step 2: How related are the changes in temperature and CO2?

To determine whether a change in CO2 corresponds well with a change in
air temperature, you can plot temperature against CO2.To do this using
ggplot, you will need to combine the temperature and CO2 datasets.

**Transform data**

Combined the temperature and CO2 data using a join. There are different
types of joins, in this case we want to save only the years with both
temperature and co2 data. Therefore we will use one of the *joins*
(left, right, inner, or full) we discussed in class (see pages 178 - 186
in Wickham and Golemund and the “Data Transformation with dplyr Cheat
Sheet”). What is the column that we will be using to join? (Note: joins
are the key new skill in this lab)

``` r
#INSERT CODE
temp_co2_data <- 
```

**Visualize data**

Plot the relationship between CO2 and temperature. This is a graph with
CO2 on the x axis and temperature on the y axis. Plot the points but do
not plot lines to connect the points because this is not a time series
plot.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

**Model data**

Fit a linear regression to the line and analyze

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

**Question 4:** (provide the answers)

  - Equation for the line:

  - R2 =

  - Based on your analysis, could atmospheric CO2 concentration explain
    the increase in average global temperature?

## Step 3: An exploration of the Vostok Ice Core?

When analyzing Earth’s climate, it is important to remember that Earth
is 4.54 billion years old. Our analyses so far have only looked at
recent history. How can we compare the recent data to pre-historic time?
Are the current rates of change similar or different than those the
earth has experienced in the past? To explore this, we can use data
taken from ice cores that were drilled at the poles.

Hundreds of ice cores have been extracted from polar ice because they
contain valuable data on atmospheric chemistry over pre-historic time.
These valuable data exist in tiny air bubbles that are trapped in the
ice. These air bubbles contain the same gases in the same ratios as the
atmosphere at the time when the ice formed. The data you will be
analyzing today are from ice cores extracted from the Vostok research
station in Antarctica. As you have probably assumed, the depth of the
ice core is related to how old the ice is; deep ice is older. There are
two other variables that you will be analyzing from the ice cores. The
first is temperature, which is reflected by isotopic ratios in the ice
of the core so that these isotopic ratios can be converted into air
temperatures. The second variable you will analyze is CO2 concentration,
which has been measured from air bubbles trapped in the ice. We can use
these data to see what rates of change were like during this
pre-historic period, during which human activity has been minimal.

**Acquire data**

The Vostok ice core data is available through the Carbon Dioxide
Information Analysis Center (CDIAC) <http://cdiac.esd.ornl.gov/>. Under
the Data dropdown menu, select Climate. Then select Temperature. Then
down at the bottom of that page there is a link called “Historic
isotopic temperature record from the Vostok Ice core, Antarctica”.
Select this link, which provide information about the core location, and
then select ‘Digital Data’ on the top of the page. Download the Vostok
ice core data to your `data_raw` directory

**Import data**

This a trickier dataset to read in. I recommend opening the file in a
text editor and looking at how many lines are present before the first
data line and at the deliminator that separates values in a line. Also,
you may need to rename some of the columns if you are having trouble
importing the header row.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
vostok_temp_data <- 
```

**Transform data**

In these data, the temperature column is not the actual temperature, but
is a the temperature variation or anomaly. To use actual temperatures
you will have to calculate them from the ‘delta D’ content. Deuterium,
or delta D, stands for the relative proportion of two types of hydrogen
(2H: 1H). Changes in the proportion of these two types of hydrogen in
ice-water correlate to the amount of evaporation and thus to ocean water
temperature. In the next column, calculate the paleo-temperature at
Vostok based on the formula describing the empirical relationship
between temperature and deuterium concentration:

``` 
    Temperature (in degrees C) = -55.5 + (delta D + 440) / 6
```

Create the new variable within the dataframe that is the calculated
temperature

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

**Visualize data**

Begin with the ice-core temperature data, and graph it using ice age as
the independent variable. Keep in mind that the x axis refers to how
many thousands of years ago, so the time axis moves in the opposite
direction as what you are accustomed to based on previous analyses
(i.e., present day is on the left side of the figure). This is the
custom for research that investigates patterns over long time periods.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

**Question 5: ** (provide the answers)

To help you orient to these plots, answer the following questions:

  - Do you think these data are a good representation of pre-historic
    rates of change?

  - Are we currently in a glacial or inter-glacial period?

  - Approximately, how long does a glacial and inter glacial period
    last?
    
      - Glacial:
    
      - Interglacial:

**Model and transform data**

Add a trend line to the ice core temperature data and look at the R2
value.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

**Question 6:** Do you think this line is a good representation of
long-term rates of temperature change?

**Answer 6:**

Now, calculate what the fastest rate of temperature change might be. To
do this, visually identify a section of your data where the temperature
is changing very rapidly. Make note of the x-axis values at the
beginning and end of the time period segments that you think have the
steepest slopes. Remember a rate of change is the temperature change
divided by the time change

\[Advance options for solving Question 7: Rather than visually selecting
a period, write code to find which period in the data is the steepest\]

Using your visual selection or you selection from the challenge, use the
x-axis values that represent the steepest period to filter the dataset
to only be your period of interest. Note: if you don’t do the challenge
you still need make this plot.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

**Visualize and model data**

Make a new graph of only your selected time period

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

Determine the rate of change in temperature by fitting a trend line and
looking at the slope.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

**Question 7:** What is this rate of pre-historic temperature change
(with units)?

**Answer 7:**

**Import data**

To download the Vostok ice core CO2 data, under the CDIAC website
<http://cdiac.esd.ornl.gov/> select ‘Atmospheric Trace Gases &
Aerosols’. Then select ‘Carbon Dioxide (CO2)’. On the next page there
is a link to ‘Vostok, Antarctica (Baronla et al.).’ The file name should
be `vostok.icecore.co2.txt`. Import the data as `vostok_co2_data` and
remember to use the correct number of line skips. Again, I recommend
opening the file in a text editor and looking at how many lines are
present before the first data line and at the deliminator that separates
values in a line (be careful with the deliminators\!).

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

**Visualize data**

Prepare a plot of CO2 concentration as a function of (gas) age. Plot
(gas) age on the x axis and CO2 on the y axis.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

**Question 8:** According to the CO2 data from ice cores, during which
time frame(s) was there the greatest rate of change in atmospheric CO2
concentration?

**Answer 8:**

**Question 9:** How do CO2 concentrations recorded over time in the ice
core compare to the current values for today, which you can see on the
Mauna Loa web site?

**Answer 9:**

**Transform and model**

Now make a new graph focused only on a time period of rapid change in
CO2.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

Determine the rate of change by fitting a trend line and looking at the
slope.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

**Question 10:** Compare the fastest natural rate of change in CO2 from
the ice-core with the modern rate of change from the Mauna Loa data that
you analyzed earlier in the module. (Remember to check your units are
equivalent).

**Answer 10:**

**Question 11:** How do current (i.e., since 1950) changes in
atmospheric CO2 concentration and average global temperature compare to
pre-historic (i.e., in the past hundreds of thousands of years) changes
in these variables?

**Answer 11:**

**Question 12:** What does this suggest about whether recent changes in
temperature are due to natural or anthropogenic (human) factors?

**Answer 12:**

**Question 13:** It is plausible that recent increase in atmospheric
carbon dioxide is a result of natural fluctuations and not
human-induced?

**Answer 13:**

## Citation

This module was initially developed as an Excel-based exercise by:

O’Reilly, C.M., D.C. Richardson, and R.D. Gougis. 15 March 2017. Project
EDDIE: Climate Change. Project EDDIE Module 8, Version 1.
<http://cemast.illinoisstate.edu/data-for-students/modules/climate-change.shtml>.
Module development was supported by NSF DEB 1245707
