Module 3: Lake Ice Phenology
================
FREC 3004: Environmental Informatics

``` r
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE)
```

## Science question

Are lakes losing ice earlier in the year?

## Environmental Learning objectives

  - Understand how global climate change impacts local aquatic
    ecosystems
  - Analyze a long-term ice-off dataset with understanding of
    statistical differences, biological relevance, and sources of
    variation
  - Predict future scenarios of ice-off

# Data Science Learning objectives

  - Applying linear regression models
  - Develop skills using R for graphing and statistics
  - Generate Rmarkdown documents
  - Practice the data science workflow in the context of the Tidyverse.

## Assumed R knowledge

mutate() group\_by() ggplot() geom\_line() geom\_point() select()
summarize() mean() filter() rename() read\_csv() head()

## R knowlege covered in module

lm() rbind() geom\_abline() geom\_smooth() geom\_histogram() confint()

## Why this matters

Lakes are changing worldwide due to altered climate. Many lakes that
were historically frozen in the winter are now experiencing fewer days
of ice cover and earlier ice-off dates (or not even freezing at all). In
this module, you will explore long-term ice-off datasets from several
lakes and use linear regression to make predictions about ice-off dates
in the future.

## Initate project

First, create a directory structure for this module (i.e., project).

  - Create a folder called `FREC3004_Module3_IcePheno`

Within that folder, create folders for the following

  - `doc`: where you will put text documents associated with the project
  - `data_raw`: where you will put raw data
  - `fig`: where you will save files generated by analysis

Save this .Rmd file in the `FREC3004_Module3_IcePheno` directory

Now create a new Project in the `FREC3004_Module3_IcePheno` directory.

Load the tidyverse

``` r
#install.packages("tidyverse")
library(tidyverse)
```

## Import

Download the data file (“lake\_ice\_phenology\_all\_lakes.csv”) from
Canvas (by clicking in Canvas, don’t use the download.file function) and
move it into your `project_directory/data_raw` directory. Then use the
function `read_csv` to import the comma delimited file into R. Name the
imported data `ice_data`.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

Now look at a preview of the data by just typing the data name
(`ice_data`). The ‘doy’ in `ice_off_doy` stands for ‘day of year’ and is
the day within the year where ice off occured.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

There should be 3 columns and 2,560 rows.

## Tidy the data

We will learn the key skills in the module using a focal lake. Use the
filter function to filter the larger data to only contain the data from
Lake Sunapee, a lake in New Hampshire. Filter the data `ice_data` by the
variable `lake_name` to create a data.frame called `sunapee`.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

You will be using the sunapee data for the rest of the module until
“Next Steps”

## Visualize the data

To visualize the data from Lake Sunapee, create an x-y plot with the
year (`year`) on the x-axis and the day of year (`ice_off_doy`) on the
y-axis. Plot the points (`geom_point`) and connectthe points with lines
(`geom_line`).  
Be sure that the title, x-axis and y-axis labels are clearly labeled.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

## Model and visualize the data

We want to model how the ice-off date is changing through time. Our
approach in this module is to use a simple linear regression. The `lm`
function will estimate the parameters of the y = mx + b linear
regression. Use the `lm` function to to predict ice\_off\_doy as a
function (~) of the year for the data.frame called `sunapee`. Create an
objectve called `fit` that contains results of the linear model.

``` r
fit <- lm(ice_off_doy ~ year, data = sunapee)
```

Then use the function `summary` to explore the result of the lm function

``` r
summary(fit)
```

The results of your linear model are in an object named `fit`, so you
can find the regression coefficients at `fit$coefficients[1]` (the
intercept) and `fit$coefficients[2]` (the slope). Confirm that
`fit$coefficients[1]` and `fit$coefficients[2]` match the values
expected from the summary command you ran above.

``` r
fit$coefficients[1]
fit$coefficients[2]
```

Second, It is important that the residuals from our linear model are
normally distributed similar to the shape of the following:

``` r
ggplot(data = tibble(value = rnorm(1000, 0, 1))) +
  geom_histogram(aes(x = value),bins = 20)
```

We will use a histogram to visually assess whether this requirement is
met. First, you will need to calculate the residuals. The residuals are
the difference between the ice-off DOY that your linear regression
predicts and the observed DOY in each year.  
\- Residuals that do not average to zero indicate that your linear
regression is biased. - Residuals that have are large indicate that
youre linear regression is not very useful for prediction.

You will use a histogram to examine the residuals. First, the code uses
the coefficients to predict the ice-off DOY at each year. Second,
calculate the residuals by subtracting the predicted ice-off DOY from
the observed DOY.

``` r
sunapee <- sunapee %>% 
  mutate(predicted = fit$coefficients[1] + year * fit$coefficients[2], 
         residual = ice_off_doy - predicted) #Observed - Predicted
```

Now to visualize the residuals use `geom_histogram` to plot them as a
histogram. I recommend using a binwidth of 5 in the histogram.

``` r
ggplot(data = sunapee) +
  geom_histogram(aes(x = residual), binwidth = 5) +
  labs(x = "residuals (DOY)", y = "Count", title = "Histogram of residuals")
```

Are the residuals normally distributed with the distribution centered
around zero?

Now plot the data for Lake Sunapee (just like above - year vs. ice of
doy) but add the results for your regression. You will use the
`geom_abline` geom. Using the help (?geom\_abline), the Tidyverse
cheatsheet, or internet for how to use the geom.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

Now use the regression line to predict the ice-off day of year in 2020.
First, use the regression coefficients with the year 2020 to calculate
the ice-off day using the linear relationship (y = b + mx)

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

## Transform, model, and visualze the data

Create two regression lines that represent a breakpoint in 1970 for the
regression.

First, create a pre 1970 dataset (before 1970): You will use the
`filter` function. Use the mutate function to add a new column named
`period` and fill it with the string “pre\_1970”

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

Second, create a post 1970 dataset (1970 and sooner): You will use the
`filter` function. Use the mutate function to add a new column named
`period` and fill it with the string “post\_1970”

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

Third, calculate a regression sepearately for the two time periods.

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

Fourth, examine the linear regressions. How do the coefficients and R2
differ between the two time periods?

Period 1:

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

Period 2:

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

Sixth, combine the to data.frames back together using the `rbind()`.
This combines two data.frames by rows (hence the r in front of bind)

``` r
recombined <- rbind(#data.frame1#, #data.frame2#)
```

Finally, add a regression line from the earliest year until 1970, and
then add the second regression line from 1970 to the present to the
ice-off vs. year plot. Then use `ggsave("/fig/plot.pdf", width = 7,
height = 5)` to save your plot. You will need to complete the code
below.

``` r
ggplot(data = recombined) +
  geom_point(mapping = aes(x = year, y = ice_off_doy, color = period)) + 
  geom_abline(mapping = aes(intercept = fit_before_1970$coefficients[1],
              slope = fit_before_1970$coefficients[2]), 
              color = "blue") + 
  
  ### Add the code that adds the second regression line 
  ### (same as the geom_abline but with different slope and intercept)
  
  scale_colour_manual(name = "Time Period",
                      values=c("black","blue"), 
                      labels = c("Post 1970","Pre 1970")) +
  labs(title ="Lake Sunapee", 
       x = "Year", 
       y = "Ice-off Day of Year")
ggsave("fig/plot.pdf", width = 7, height = 5)
```

Predict the ice-off day in 2020 using the two different regressions. How
do your results depend on the time period used to create your model?

``` r
#INSERT CODE
```

## Next Steps

Focus only on the following 7 lakes: Baikal, Cazenovia, Mendota, Monona,
Oneida, Sunapee, Wingra

Recall from Module 2 how subset based on the elements in a list.

**Question 1:** Make a figure using the facet capacity to create
separate panels for each lake. The figure must include the regression
line for each lake using  
`geom_smooth(method = "lm", se = FALSE, color = "blue", formula = y ~
x)`. Be sure that the x and y are defined as aes with the ggplot
function call. The figure must be clearly labeled (x axis, y axis,
title, axis units). See labs() function above.

**Answer 1:**

**Question 2:** Describe your figure using a 1-2 sentence figure
caption.

Writing a concise figure caption is an important scientific skill.
Peruse scientific literature for examples of figure captions, such as
the Magnuson et al. 2000 paper (see Canvas). Be brief\! The first
sentence of the caption can also be considered a title. If you use
abbreviations in the axis label, you must define it in caption. Do not
include the ‘why’ in a figure caption; only describe the ‘what.’

**Answer 2:**

**Question 3:** Which lake is showing the most change in the ice-off day
of year? Which is showing the least change in the ice-off day of year?
(use separate linear regressions to calculate the different slopes)

**Answer 3:**

**Question 4:** Is the change in ice-off day (i.e., slope of regression)
related to any of the characteristics (latitude, lake area, or tropic
status) included in the power point presentation? No need to provide an
analysis. Just provide text

**Answer 4:**

**Question 5:** What is the predicted ice-off day in 2018 and 2050 for
the lake with the largest slope ? How many days earlier is ice-off
predicted to occur? Be sure that your predictions are print out to the
Knited document.

**Answer 5:**

**Question 6:** If you were to report this prediction to a lake manager,
what caveats about this prediction would you also provide?

**Answer 6**:

**Question 7:** Revisit your analysis code and the set of functions that
you used. Assign each of the functions that you used to the most
appropriate component of the data science workflow (Data Science
workflow in Wickland and Grolemund 2017, page ix)

**Answer 7:**

Import:

Tidy:

Transform:

Model:

Visualize:

Communicate:

## Citation

This module was initially developed as a Excel-based activity by Carey,
C.C., J.L. Klug, and D.C. Richardson. 1 April 2015. Project EDDIE: Lake
Ice Phenology. Project EDDIE Module 1, Version 1:
<http://cemast.illinoisstate.edu/data-for-students/modules/ice-phenology.shtml>.
Module development was supported by NSF DEB 1245707.
